Dyslipidemia is characterized by elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) or triglycerides, or reduced levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C).
Elevated LDL-C is a major risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Statins such as atorvastatin and rosuvastatin lower LDL-C by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis.
High-intensity statin therapy can reduce LDL-C by 50% or more.
HDL-C is involved in reverse cholesterol transport, carrying cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver for excretion.
PCSK9 inhibitors such as evolocumab and alirocumab lower LDL-C by preventing degradation of LDL receptors on hepatocytes.
Ezetimibe reduces intestinal cholesterol absorption and is used as add-on therapy to statins.
Familial hypercholesterolemia is an inherited disorder caused by mutations in the LDL receptor gene, leading to severely elevated LDL-C from birth.
The 10-year atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk score is used to guide statin initiation in primary prevention.
Statin therapy is recommended for all patients with established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease regardless of baseline LDL-C.
Myopathy is the most clinically significant adverse effect of statin therapy.
Elevated triglycerides are associated with increased risk of pancreatitis when levels exceed 500 mg/dL.
Fibrates such as fenofibrate lower triglycerides by activating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha.
Omega-3 fatty acids reduce triglyceride levels and may be used as adjunctive therapy in severe hypertriglyceridemia.
Lipoprotein(a) is an independent genetic risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease that is not reduced by statins.
Apolipoprotein B is a measure of the total number of atherogenic lipoprotein particles and may be a better predictor of cardiovascular risk than LDL-C alone.
Lifestyle modifications including dietary changes, exercise, and weight loss are first-line interventions for dyslipidemia.
Non-HDL cholesterol, calculated as total cholesterol minus HDL-C, captures all atherogenic lipoproteins and is a secondary treatment target.
Bempedoic acid inhibits ATP citrate lyase, an enzyme upstream of HMG-CoA reductase, and is used in patients who are statin-intolerant.
Inclisiran is a small interfering RNA that targets PCSK9 mRNA in the liver and requires only twice-yearly dosing.
